NAME:  What Does It Take to Heat a New Room? 
TYPE:  Time series
SIZE:  81 observations, 13 variables

DESCRIPTIVE ABSTRACT:
In a residential home, energy consumption is closely related to the
outdoor temperature and size of the house.   In a home of a given size,
temperature fluctuations and energy consumption vary fairly predictably
over time.  When homeowners add a room, other things being equal,
utility usage should increase.  This dataset permits students to
estimate the energy demand and make forecasts for future months, as
well as explore other relationships.

The dataset contains natural gas and electricity usage data for a
gas-heated single-family residence in the Boston area from September
1990 through May 1997, accompanied by monthly climatological data.  
The dataset is useful for illustrating the concepts and techniques of
central tendency, dispersion, elementary time series analysis,
correlation, simple and multiple regression, and variable
transformations.

SOURCES:
Bay State Gas Co., Boston Edison, National Weather Service Taunton (MA)
Regional Office.

VARIABLE DESCRIPTIONS:
Columns
 1 -  7  Observation month (formatted mmm-yy)
10 - 11  Number of days in the month
14 - 15  Mean monthly temperature in Boston, in degrees Fahrenheit
17 - 20  Mean natural gas usage per day for the month, in therms
23 - 25  Total therms used for the month
28 - 29  Days in the gas company billing cycle for the month
31 - 34  Total kilowatt hours consumed in the month
36 - 39  Mean kilowatt hours per day for the month
42 - 43  Days in the electric company billing cycle for the month
     46  Dummy variable for method of determining kwh for the month 
         (0 = actual month-end meter reading, 1 = estimated reading)
48 - 51  Total heating degree days for the month
54 - 56  Total cooling degree days for the month
     58  Dummy variable for the new room
         (0 = pre-addition, 1 = post-addition)

Values are aligned and delimited by blanks.  

A therm is a standard measure of the heating capacity of a cubic foot
of natural gas.  Due to changes in air temperature during the year, the
heating capacity varies from month to month.

Degree days are a measure of temperature fluctuations that stimulate
demand for heating or cooling.  Specifically, heating degree days are
sums of the absolute value of temperature deviations below a base
temperature of 65 degrees Fahrenheit.  For example, if the mean daily
temperature were 60 degrees one day, that would represent five heating
degree days.  Conversely, cooling degree days sum the positive
deviations from the base of 65 degrees.

SPECIAL NOTES:
For billing purposes, the gas utility month starts on the 18th of the
month, while the electric utility month starts on the 12th.   For
example, the January gas bill refers to usage from December 18 through
January 17 (approximately) and the electric bill for the same month
refers to usage from December 12 through January 11 (approximately).
The gas company calculates usage based on a monthly electronic reading
of the gas meter, but the electric company meter reader visits the
house every other month; in the alternate months, the electric company
estimates electricity consumption.  Sundays, holidays, and snowstorms
can interrupt the schedule.  In the summer months, the gas company
issues one bill for July and August, and one for September and
October.

STORY BEHIND THE DATA:
In our home, our furnace and water heater both use natural gas.  We
have a gas stove, but our clothes dryer is all-electric.  In early
1996, we added a bedroom and enlarged the kitchen, and we were
interested in estimating the additional consumption of natural gas
attributable to the new room.   The family remained the same size and
did not change hot-water-use habits.  The new construction improved the
insulation in the affected areas, and several new lighting circuits
were added.  There were no other changes that would influence energy
consumption.

The major questions that prompted collection of the data are these: 

In an average month, do we use additional natural gas as a result of 
adding a room? If so, how much?

In an average month, do we use additional electricity as a result of 
adding a room? If so, how much?

Additional information about these data can be found in the "Datasets
and Stories" article "What Does It Take to Heat a New Room?  Estimating
Utility Demand in a Home" in the _Journal of Statistics Education_
(Carver 1998).  

PEDAGOGICAL NOTES:
This dataset can be useful at several points in an introductory
course.  The mean monthly temperature data offer a familiar example for
descriptive techniques.  The degree day variables can lead to very
useful discussions of "what does this variable measure"?  Simple time
series plots of the gas and electricity consumption, as well as the
various temperature measures, nicely illustrate seasonal variation.
More substantially, the intent in compiling the data was causal
modeling, and the relationship between outdoor temperature and energy
consumption lends itself well to correlation and regression analysis.
With multiple regression, the addition of the new room can be
introduced into the model.  Because gas consumption is theoretically
flat above some high mean temperature, the dataset provides an
example of the usefulness of piece-wise linear models or curvilinear
transformations, and can illustrate the risks of ill-considered
extrapolation.

REFERENCE:
A dataset including temperature and electricity consumption can be
found in Chatterjee, S., Handcock, M., and Simonoff (1995), _A Casebook
for a First Course in Statistics and Data Analysis_, New York: Wiley,
pp. 177-184.

SUBMITTED BY:
Robert Carver
Department of Business Administration
Stonehill College
320 Washington Street
Easton, MA  02357-1150
rcarver@stonehill.edu
